Hello, dear colleagues.
The stable performance of companies depends on successful implementation of products.
Ultimately, optimally formed sales channels increase the competitive
sustainability of enterprises and are a strategic tool for managing
companies.
The success of your company depends on how stable your client base is,
how optimally formed your sales channels are,
and how successful your company is in the market.
In this course, we will consider how to optimally and economically
form a sales channel, find new clients, keep existing ones,
and also consider the specifics of the market and the specifics of your product.
In the first section of the course, we will consider the trends of the market of distribution,
how it develops depending on the market development,
how it is modified and what its specifics are.
In the second section, we will consider the sales development strategies,
where we can see how, depending on the specifics of your product
and your company, to form a sales channel and what sales strategy
to choose for your company.
In the third section, we will consider the technology of the development of the sales network,
where we will consider the methods of finding new clients in the industries and regions,
where we will consider the methods of assessing the economic efficiency of your clients.
Because without an assessment, we simply cannot form an optimal sales network.
In the fourth section of our course, we will consider how to properly
and more accurately form a sales plan of a company,
because this is what determines the implementation of the company's budget
and the optimally formed sales networks.
And, of course, when our sales network is formed,
the next thing we have to do is to clearly control our sales network
and analyze its effectiveness.
The first thing we will start with in our course
is, of course, the history of the formation of distribution.
Our history of market development has already gone through at least three stages,
and now the fourth one begins.
What three stages have we gone through? Let's take a look.
The first stage, which began in the 1990s, was characterized by the following indicators.
Foreign companies came to our market,
who offered quality inexpensive goods.
And, of course, this product could not compete on the shelves with our domestic manufacturer.
Naturally, companies that represented the interests of foreign companies began to be created here.
The domestic market was simply in decline.
And this situation lasted until 1995.
Another characteristic, the most important for the first stage,
is that the market was unstructured.
There were huge turnovers in the market, and companies were making super profits.
The market allowed this to be done.
But as the market became, as it developed, the situation, of course, became more complicated.
The competition increased, more and more foreign manufacturers came to the market,
and domestic companies began to slowly rise their heads.
At the second stage, strong domestic manufacturers appear,
who work mainly on the FMCG market,
since this market develops the fastest in our Russia.
The expansion of foreign manufacturers is gaining momentum.
Foreign manufacturers begin to enter regions where they create their exclusive representations,
and their distribution system is developing very actively.
The second stage continues until 1998.
1998, as you remember, was characterized by special events.
It was Black Tuesday, when the ruble collapsed and the dollar rate grew very strongly.
At this stage, foreign manufacturers were forced to leave the market,
because their prices simply became uncompetitive.
At this moment, our domestic manufacturers got a kind of a head start,
although it was also difficult for them to survive this crisis, but they stood the strongest.
And just from this moment, a very active development of the domestic manufacturers market begins.
At the third stage, which, in principle, took place just before 2006,
the development of domestic manufacturers was the most active.
This is the pharmaceutical market, the food product market, the consumer goods market.
We see how it is actively developing now.
If we talk about the industrial market, then things are much worse there,
because 70% of industrial equipment is outdated and does not meet the requirements of new technologies.
So far, industrial companies have no funds to make a complete update.
And mostly, the middle business is developing here.
Large and large-scale industries still cannot restore their production.
What is happening in the distribution market?
There is a reduction, and the reduction is very serious.
If at the second stage companies created their distribution system
and created many distributors in different regions,
because it was necessary to get a wide distribution of products,
to get every corner of the Russian Federation, so that this product was presented,
then now the next stage is taking place.
The number of distributors is beginning to decrease,
because it is difficult for companies to control all the distributors that have appeared and that are working.
The best are chosen in each region and an exclusive distribution system is created.
This is what is happening in the market, where foreign manufacturers are leading.
Russian manufacturers are still actively developing their distribution system.
And just as everything was with foreign manufacturers at the second stage,
now we are on the same path.
Another trend that characterizes the third stage is the formation of a network retail.
We see how the network retail is formed in our market.
If you pay attention to the slide, you will see that the growth in retail sales through the network has increased 10 times,
starting only in 1999.
And given that in the foreign market the retail retail takes up from 60 to 80%,
and in our market it takes up 24-25%,
we see that there is a very large trend for growth,
and this trend will prevail over the next few years.
How do manufacturers react to the current situation?
The first thing they do, of course, is to reduce the number of distributors.
They have gone this way.
Let's look at some examples.
The Saninterbryu company had 430 distributors in the Russian Federation.
Today, it has reduced them to only 12.
This allows you to strictly control the distribution system,
control the efficiency of the sales channels,
and not spend money and other resources in vain.
The Achakov company, with 300 distributors,
reduced its distribution system to only 6.
The next response from distributors is to create their own system.
For example, the Kalina company refuses to use regional warehouses
and creates its own dealer system.
Other companies, such as Pecor, Procter & Gamble,
also create their own distributor system.
Another important trend is the creation of key accounts,
the creation of direct retail departments.
Why is this happening?
Because we cannot give such an important part of the work
as working with a retail network for a refund.
There is a strict control,
strict control of supplies, merchandising,
payments, price education.
And, of course, large companies do this on their own,
creating their own departments.
And all the rest of the work on wholesale channels
they transfer to their distributors.
So, let's summarize some logical conclusions
of the trend of the distribution market development.
And its near future.
Today, there is a gradual advent of foreign distributors
in the Russian market,
who implement a well-established service system,
which is very important for the Russian market,
because the service in the Russian market is still far from perfection.
The next trend is the import of production to developing countries.
Many companies, even Russian manufacturers,
have seen the efficiency of production in China or the CIS countries,
because production there is much cheaper
and profitability is much higher.
The crisis of industrial enterprises, unfortunately, continues.
Today, outdated equipment and high cost of production
do not allow companies to produce competitive goods.
The next trend is the re-dealing of ownership
in the most actively developing markets.
What markets can be cited as an example?
This is the telecommunications market,
the raw materials market, the banking market,
and probably others, which are most actively developing now.
Unfortunately, such a trend exists.
Another tendency is the active development of the middle business.
Despite the fact that the state does not actively support the development of the middle business,
nevertheless, the companies that received the forum in 1998
continue to feel stable, active and develop further.
Another tendency that I would like to note is the introduction of innovation in various companies.
Moreover, innovations at completely different levels.
Innovations in the management system, innovations in the assortment portfolio,
and, of course, innovations in the distribution system.
Many companies try, and by trial and error,
choose the most effective ways of distributing their products.
We will start considering the development of the strategy from the household network from the very beginning,
that is, from the life cycle of the product.
Why the life cycle of the product?
Because the strategy of sales, which you will develop and form, and then optimize,
depends on what product you sell, new or already released on the market.
What is the life cycle of the product?
This is a conceptual model that shows that the product, like everything alive on this earth,
grows, enters the stage of maturity, and then dies.
The slide shows all the life cycles of the product.
There are four of them, but here we have divided them into five,
because each cycle has its own stage of development and its own formation from the household network.
The first stage is the introduction, when the product is just being developed
and goes to the market as an experimental sample of the product.
The next stage is growth, when the active growth of the market begins,
and there, accordingly, their laws of development come into force.
The next stage is turbulence.
It is highlighted, unlike the classic model.
Why is it highlighted?
The stage of turbulence has its own specifics.
The fact is that at this stage, the active growth of the market ends,
and the most tough competition occurs.
Here, in order to withstand and survive the company, you need to be very active.
The next stage is maturity, when the product is sold steadily,
when everyone knows it, but, of course, the profitability on this product decreases.
Nevertheless, the household network is already formed, and the product is sold steadily.
And the stage of decline, when the product is morally outdated,
or technically outdated, or new developments appear.
At this stage, the product is sold out, and, of course, the household network also changes.
Let's take a closer look at each stage.
The first stage is implementation.
Let's consider it from the point of view of three aspects.
From the point of view of the macro environment, from the point of view of the strategic goals of the company,
and from the point of view of the marketing program,
which must be carried out at this stage of product development.
What is characterized by the macro environment?
Very slow growth of the primary demand.
No one knows about your product yet.
It is just coming to the market.
Therefore, of course, we cannot demand from the market when only innovators know the product.
Those people who make up only 2% of the total number of consumers or your clients.
Therefore, here, of course, our goal is to capture the segment of innovators,
tell them about our product, offer them our product.
At this stage, there are practically no competitors, and the company is either a monopolist,
if this is a know-how, of course, if this is not a know-how, but just an improved type of existing product.
Then, of course, there are competitors, but maybe they have not yet released a product with such characteristics
that you offer on the market.
Strategic goals of the company.
What goals are the company pursuing at this stage?
The first, of course, is to create demand in order for our product to be recognized
and in order for it to be bought at least for the first time and tried to be used.
At this stage, we need to inform our clients and teach them to use our product
so that they can do it comfortably and so that the impression of our product is the most positive, the most attractive.
Therefore, another goal is to stimulate trial purchases.
After all, if no one tries our product, then, accordingly, no one will buy it.
Well, and, of course, at this stage, one of the main goals is to form a home network.
Because if we do not do it and do not form it, we simply will not have a place to offer our product.
From the point of view of the marketing program, what goals and tasks do we set for ourselves here?
Well, the first is regarding the product.
We sell, of course, the basic model that we have just developed.
What is the best sales strategy at this stage?
Is it exclusive sales or selective sales?
Exclusive sales is sales through one intermediary in a given region or territory.
Selective sales is through a limited number of intermediaries.
We will come back to this and consider more details about the sales strategy.
Why is only selective or exclusive sales needed at this stage?
The fact is that you need to look for companies and specialists who can competently and correctly present your product to the market.
If they do it wrong or do it wrong, your product will not be accepted by the market
and, accordingly, will not be sold in the volumes that you have planned.
The price. What do we do with our price here?
Here we can apply the strategy of removing the creams.
Is your product a know-how or some kind of exclusive?
Well, for example, your product is a software that all companies need to use.
Then you can set any price.
Companies will not go anywhere, they will be forced to buy your product.
You can easily earn money on this.
You can also bring real estate to the market.
The next price strategy is the strategy of expanding the market.
At this stage, you can apply the strategy if your product is an improved copy of an existing product
or has some additional functions that are, of course, necessary for the consumer.
Due to the fact that you set a small price on the market, the product is quickly distributed.
It is tried by a larger number of consumers.
And such a strategy is applicable if the cost of the product decreases with the increase in production.
Then it is profitable.
What do we do with communications?
Communication, of course, is the information of our clients.
If we do not tell them about our product, they may not recognize it and, accordingly, not buy it.
The next stage is the growth stage.
What is the characteristic of the macro-environment at the growth stage?
Increasing the pace of market development.
The most active growth of the market takes place at this stage.
New competitors appear here, their number increases.
Because other companies saw your success and decided to repeat it.
This happens in all markets.
And here the goal from the point of view of consumers is a segment of the so-called early perception,
which is about 17% of all buyers, of all customers.
What else is characterized by the macro-environment?
Of course, the spread of your technology.
At first you were the first, and now your competitors are starting to use this technology
and apply it in their production and distribution.
What strategic goals does the company set for itself at this stage?
Increasing the primary demand.
The market is growing and our task is to capture as many customers as possible,
because competitors now also claim their wallet.
The next goal is to create the image of the company or the trading brand.
Here, as you decide, if you have industrial products,
it may be more purposeful to create the image of the company.
And if you produce or sell products related to the goods of the popular consumption or the FMCG market,
then the trading brand will certainly play a positive role in the development of this product.
Two more goals that characterize this stage are increasing the market cap,
because we need to increase our distribution system.
We no longer care about the selective or exclusive sales of the strategy
that we used at the first stage of our development.
This system does not have time to sell our product.
And here our task is to increase our number of intermediaries, our sales network.
And, of course, creating a loyalty to the product is the next goal that our company should pursue.
Why? Our product should be liked.
If it is not liked, we will not see repeated purchases.
Without repeated purchases, there will be no need for a sales system.
Marketing program. What is it characterized by?
Well, the first thing we look at is, of course, the range.
We start thinking about improving the product.
Some functions may need to be added or slightly change the design,
because competitors are coming to us.
And already at this stage, the company must think about how not to lose the market,
how to improve their product a little.
And this can be done not only in the product itself.
You can add service functions, you can add additional services
that will be a competitive advantage for your company at this stage,
relative to your competitors.
What is the sales strategy here?
Of course, intensive sales.
At the growth stage, as we have already said, our main goal is to expand the market.
Accordingly, we can make and implement the expansion of the market only with the help of intensive sales.
Intensive sales means the maximum number of intermediaries,
the maximum that we can organize with you.
Price. Of course, the price will play a very big role here.
But if our task is to expand the market,
our profit or our marginal income,
we must act a little, we must reduce it a little
in order to win the market, to outrun our competitors.
The communication system.
What will we do in the communication system with you?
Of course, we will determine the image of the product.
We have already informed our clients that our product exists.
We have told them about the characteristics, we have taught them to use our product.
Now we need to consolidate the image, increase the popularity of our product.
Accordingly, all the communications that we produce should be aimed at this.
The next stage is turbulence.
Just the same stage that we talked about, very specific.
What is the characteristic of the macro environment at this stage?
Slowdown in growth rates.
We no longer see such an intense growth as at the previous stage.
It begins to decrease.
And, accordingly, there is a hard division of the market between competitors.
After all, someone must leave this market.
So many competitors cannot offer their products and, accordingly, the strongest will survive.
Weak competitors simply leave the market.
What is the goal here?
The market majority, which is about 60%, 60-65% according to statistics,
depending, of course, on the product.
This is our goal.
Here we begin to sell the product most massively.
But, nevertheless, the profit at this stage is not the greatest,
because funds are spent on the fight against competitors.
Strategic goals. What are they characterized by?
The first is, of course, working with target segments.
Look, at the previous stage, we made an intensive sale.
We sold to everyone who could, who would buy this product.
Now comes the stage of specialization,
when it is necessary to clearly segment the market,
to highlight its target segments and direct its impact only on the target segments.
We will consider the segmentation method,
we will determine our target segments in order to optimize and concentrate resources,
and not shoot at the sparrows with guns.
What is the goal here?
The maximization of the market share. Why?
Because the larger the market share we capture,
the more stable we will feel,
because competitors want to take what is theirs.
What is the other goal?
The clear positioning of the trading mark.
After all, as they say, if we do not position it in the head of the buyer,
the buyer will position it on his own.
And another goal is to maintain loyalty to the product or the trading mark.
This is what you decide for yourself.
If it is an industrial product, then, accordingly, you form loyalty to the brand of the company
or to the trading mark that you have determined for your product.
What is the marketing program characterized by?
If we have highlighted our target segments,
of course, for each target segment we will make our own individual proposal.
Therefore, here we will divide the range,
determine the price and communication depending on the target segment.
Everything is directed only at this.
And in each target segment we will have our own communication, price and range.
The next stage is maturity.
Maturity is a good stage.
When there are stable sales of products,
when there is a share of the market that we hold.
True, the margin of income and profit are slightly reduced,
but due to the turnover that we have, we get enough.
What is the characteristic of the macro environment at this stage?
The first is non-expanding demand.
The market has stagnated.
It has become constant and we can only count on some deepening.
We must accept and understand this.
Regarding competition.
At this stage, there is usually a certain number of strong competitors
who have established their place in this market and are playing the leading positions.
At this stage, it is very difficult to enter the market.
There are very high entry barriers,
because the number of competitors and the number of players in this market has become stable.
Most often, these companies do not allow beginners to enter this market.
It is very difficult.
What strategic goals do we pursue at this stage?
The first is, of course, the differentiation of goods.
What is it?
We should not allow the goods to be like one another,
similar to the goods of competitors.
We should be different in something.
What is a competitive advantage?
A competitive advantage is when your product or service
has at least some positive difference from the competitors.
And the main buyer knows about it.
Or you try to convey this information to him.
That is, the difference, differentiation is the most important thing here.
If your product merges with the products of competitors,
it is unlikely that you will keep your share of the market.
What other goals do we set for ourselves?
The exit to new niches.
After all, we want to develop, and the market has already risen.
We are looking for new niches, new segments that could use our products.
And this allows us to expand at this stage.
What happens to the goods?
We understand that the goods that are at the stage of maturity
will come to the stage of decline.
What should be done?
New functions should be added,
new types of goods should be changed and developed
in order to extend their life.
Or finish the life of this modification
and bring a new product to the market,
and manage to do it at the same time,
so that the company does not have failures,
breaks in the sale of this product.
Marketing program.
What are we focusing on in the marketing program?
The first is, of course, the product, the assortment.
As I said, the assortment should be differentiated,
that is, to be different from the competitors.
And what is interesting,
there should be a difference in each segment,
because there are competitors in each segment.
And we will pay attention to this in the future.
The sales system.
The sales system returns to the selective.
We no longer use intensive sales.
Why?
Because we are satisfied with those companies
that have shown themselves to be the most active,
sell our goods the best.
We leave a limited number of intermediaries
and only through them we sell our products.
This allows us to control them more rigidly,
which is very important at the stage of maturity
to save our share of the market,
so that it does not fall anywhere.
Communication.
What do we do with the communication system?
Of course, we direct it all to loyalty.
We need to keep existing customers.
New customers are great.
And there is always a certain rotation of the customer base in the company.
But it is expensive to look for new customers.
At the stage of maturity, this is almost unacceptable.
Therefore, the most important thing here is
to keep the base of existing customers
with whom we have been working for a long time,
who know our product, know its specifics
and know how to present it on our market.
And the last stage is the stage of decline or decline,
when our product, according to all the laws, should die.
Fortunately or unfortunately, this happens at a certain point.
What is the characteristic of the macro environment at this stage?
This is zero demand, in fact.
Or even negative.
That is, the demand is falling,
no one wants to buy our product anymore.
Because it has either become morally outdated,
or technically, or there are more interesting new models
for the consumer or for our client.
What is our goal?
Of course, the segment of conservators.
There are always people who are used to this product,
who like it,
who come again and again for this modification.
And there is nothing strange about it.
Therefore, of course, we must focus on this segment.
And slowly start selling our product.
Competitors.
Competitors leave the market.
Or they also take this product out of their assortment.
What are the strategic goals of the company?
What should it do?
What strategic goals are pursued by the company at this stage?
Well, of course, leaving this market.
With this particular product.
If there are new modifications,
a new stage of the life cycle begins.
And with this product modification,
of course, care.
Gradual care, not sudden.
This is the plus.
That is, we should not immediately cut off all the ends.
What can be done?
You can turn into a specialist firm
and say, we sell only this product,
we specialize in it.
We offer this product best of all.
This will help to sell the rest of the product,
to offer a new model to the market in the future.
What is the marketing program?
What is done here?
In the marketing program,
I would like to say especially about the fact
that at this stage you cannot advertise your product en masse.
Because this is perceived by consumers negatively.
As soon as you advertise a product
that is at the stage of decline,
your product dies instantly.
And you won't even be able to sell it.
And the most important thing here is
to gradually sell our product.
Therefore, you need to work very carefully with our clients.
The first thing to do is to put a limited assortment of products on the market.
That is, only the best-selling models
that were in this assortment.
This is the first.
The second is the price.
Well, it depends on the buyers.
If buyers come for this product,
if there is a segment of conservators
who are ready to buy it for some time,
you can even raise the price.
Because there is not much of this product left.
But if such a situation is not observed,
then, of course, it is better to lower the prices
and slowly sell the product
in order not to cause any negativity for the buyers.
The communication system.
What do we do with the communication system?
The communication system is aimed at loyal consumers.
Only at them.
That is, those who like the product,
who buy it,
we only work with them.
We inform them about discounts,
invite them to various programs,
hold small promotional events for them
so that the product is gradually and finally sold.
And the sales system.
Of course, high-selective sales,
or maybe even exclusive.
We leave a minimum number of distributors
or dealers in this distribution system.
Because the product is sold,
there is no point in spending large funds
to supply the product to the entire retail network.
Thus, we have considered all stages of the product life cycle
and saw that at each stage
the distribution system has its own specifics.
This must be taken into account
when forming a retail network.
And what to do if there are different products
in the assortment portfolio?
And so it happens.
It never happens that the products are new
or only at the stage of maturity or only at the stage of decline.
Every time you need to look at
what product,
on what distribution channels we can sell.
This specificity must be taken into account.
That is why the sales system
is a very complex strategic process
that needs to be managed.
You can manage it only when
you will adjust the sales system
for each group of goods.
We have considered the product life cycle.
What sales strategies
are recommended to use
at each product life cycle?
Now let's turn to the sales strategies
of the company in more detail.
You can see them on the slide.
The first strategy that we will consider
is, of course, the intensive sales strategy.
This is one of the three strategies
that relate to indirect sales.
Indirect sales is sales through an intermediary,
that is, not directly to customers.
Intensive sales.
What is this strategy?
This is when we sell to the maximum number of customers.
Let's take an example of a food product market.
For example, we sell chocolate.
In order for it to sell well,
it must be presented
in the maximum number of points.
Why?
Because if there is no chocolate,
the customer will easily switch to another one.
He will not go to the second or third store
to buy the chocolate he needs.
In most cases.
Of course, not everyone will do this,
but nevertheless, most buyers
tend to switch to another product.
And it's good if they don't like the product.
And if they like it,
they are unlikely to return to you.
And thus you lose customers.
Therefore, the key factor of success
is the presence of the product
in the maximum number of points
so that the customer can find your product anywhere.
Of course, this strategy has pros and cons.
What are the main advantages?
The first is a fast exit to the market.
Of course, when we sell our product
through the maximum number of intermediaries,
it is faster to be mastered
in all markets where we offer it.
That is, we have the opportunity
to quickly go to the market,
to shorten the time.
This is a very big plus
in our fast-flowing century.
To outrun competitors is the main advantage here.
And of course, the maximum market capacity.
Not only did we exit quickly,
we occupied the trading points
that we needed.
However, there are also cons.
What are the cons?
Loss of control over the market.
You can't control every intermediary
that offers your product.
It's very difficult,
and almost impossible.
If we say that we control everyone,
we are deceiving ourselves.
This is not true.
It is impossible to control everyone,
even small intermediaries.
What else can be a minus?
The image of the company can be worsened.
I'll give you an example.
The Moscow company,
a milk product manufacturer,
produces circuses glazed in chocolate.
One of the intermediaries
is located in Vladivostok.
The company uses
the strategy of intensive sales.
What happened in this company?
There was a decline in the market.
Summer season.
The sales fell,
and the company decided
to reduce the price
to activate the sales.
It offered its intermediaries
the product at a reduced price.
The intermediaries happily bought it,
because they understood
that it is always easier
to sell a product at a lower price.
This is a certain advantage
over competitors.
Everyone bought it,
but you understand
that the production was limited.
The circuses were also limited.
The production was offered
at the end of July.
It took about a month and a half
to realize the product,
which was enough
at the offered prices.
It was necessary to free up the warehouse
to sell the new product.
What did they do in Vladivostok?
They decided
why they would sell
at a reduced price.
The market was going up
from August 25th
to August 25th.
They decided
to sell the product
at the offered prices
until September 10th.
They decided
to sell the product
at a reduced price.
Of course,
they did not consult
the manufacturers.
It was in their financial interests.
They waited until August 25th
and sold the product
at the shops in Vladivostok.
Of course,
no miracle happened.
The company did not sell
the product.
But the horror is
that many shops
do not control
the shelf life of the products
on their shelves.
The specificity of the retail
is so far possible.
The product was left on the shelves
after September 10th.
Then, in Vladivostok,
11 children were poisoned.
Thank God,
all of them survived.
But the wave
was very strong.
It was published in the media
and on TV.
Of course,
the manufacturer was blamed
and not the intermediary company.
The manufacturer was mentioned
and the company
could not sell
the product for 2.5 years.
Nobody bought it.
Thus, the intermediary
ruined the image of the company.
Here is one example
of loss of control.
The next strategy
is the selective sale.
It is a sale
through a certain number of intermediaries.
We do not sell
everywhere as in the previous case.
We sell through certain companies
that we have chosen
and evaluated.
What are the advantages
and disadvantages?
The advantage is that we can
effectively cooperate with intermediaries.
We can control, guide,
train and optimize the assortment.
We have more effective interaction.
We understand each other.
The number of intermediaries is limited.
We can control
the price formation,
the assortment
and the methods of competition.
We can do all this
because the company has enough resources.
What is the disadvantage?
The limited market coverage
compared to the previous example.
We cannot simply
put our product everywhere.
We have a slower market output.
And, of course, the buyer
cannot find our product in every trading point.
But in some cases it is not necessary.
For example, the furniture market.
It is not necessary
to have it in every store.
Because we go to the furniture store
instead of the grocery store
or some other center.
The household equipment market
also includes its own stores
and retail chains.
There is no need
for an intensive sales strategy.
The selective sales strategy
or the elective strategy is used
and works very well.
The next option
is the exclusive sales strategy.
The exclusive sales strategy
is the sales of one intermediary
on a given territory.
It does not mean that you have
a company all over the country
that offers products.
Of course, not.
Each territory has its own intermediary
that represents your interests.
This strategy has its advantages
and disadvantages.
The first advantage is
that you control every step of your intermediary.
You have a limited number of intermediaries.
For example,
you are represented in six regions
and you have six intermediaries.
It is very easy to control them,
to cooperate with them.
It is great to work with them
as with partners.
And of course,
the image of the brand is well maintained.
It does not suffer anymore.
But what is the disadvantage?
The disadvantage is the very limited market coverage.
The second disadvantage is that you depend on your intermediary.
If he suddenly stops working
on your product,
he will stop working
if he stops making money.
Because the main goal of an intermediary
is not your product,
but the profit he gets from it.
If he was offered
some other product with more profitable conditions,
he will naturally move there.
If, of course,
you do not have a loyal system,
you do not have personal relations with this client,
and so on.
And one more disadvantage.
It is a very high demand for the quality of the product.
Everything is under the radar here.
Everything is considered under the magnifying glass.
An intermediary who takes your product
as an exclusive
will simply not sell a low-quality product.
He will not be interested in it.
I will give an example
of dependence on an intermediary,
which, in general,
needs to be feared
and not to be allowed
to do business.
When I worked at an industrial enterprise,
we formed a home network
on air conditioning systems.
It was 1998.
It was a very good situation
when foreign companies
began to leave the market,
and domestic manufacturers
began to raise their heads.
At that time,
one of the enterprises
purchased very serious equipment
and, using assembly technology,
assembled air conditioning systems.
There were split systems
and central air conditioning systems.
And, of course, we needed a home network.
In one of the regions,
the North-Western region,
we had a contract
for exclusive distribution.
That is, one company
represented our interests.
But after analyzing the sales,
we saw that the sales were not going as well
as we would like.
We assessed the potential of this region
and found that the company
was not working at full capacity.
We began to analyze their sales.
We were given an answer
that our products were not very well known
and the price was a little high,
so they were not selling very well.
But in other regions,
the products were very successful.
We began to conduct an analysis.
We interviewed the clients of the companies
who bought these products
in order to understand
how they were doing.
When interviewing the clients,
we found out the following situation.
The company's work is not satisfied
with the market of St. Petersburg
because it does not fulfill
its obligations on service,
delivery,
service of air conditioning systems.
And this is very important
because it is a technology.
Moreover, the market is narrow.
The clients were very happy
with each other.
They were very happy
because the clients
were very fast in delivering information.
And the company itself,
not even in relation to our products,
but in general,
began to lose its position in this market.
But since their turnover was high,
they did not feel it.
Accordingly, we decided
to terminate the exclusive contract
and work with a completely different company.
We chose not such a large company,
an average company,
but a very actively developing one.
Just after the change
of the exclusive distributor,
our sales increased by 27%.
This was a very good result.
There was a clear reason
why the sales did not go the way
we wanted.
There is one more strategy left.
This is a strategy of direct sales.
In the whole world,
this strategy is considered the most effective
because you offer the product yourself,
you sell it yourself,
you can tell everything about it
to your client directly.
And this is a big plus.
Moreover, during the deal
you can offer special conditions,
which is often done.
No one will know about it.
This is also a plus,
because it leads to the result.
What are the disadvantages?
The disadvantage is that professionals are needed.
If your product is offered
by an unprofessional seller,
the deal can go wrong,
even a very large one.
But in the direct sales market
the deals are usually very large.
Therefore,
very serious professionals
are needed for direct sales.
What else would I like to say
about direct sales?
You probably know the so-called
network marketing system.
Although these are also direct sales,
in the West it is considered
one of the most effective methods of sales.
Many companies work like this.
Unfortunately, in Russia
the Chinese product,
which was sold by hand,
was discredited.
It was of absolutely low quality
and could be thrown away the next day.
There was no guarantee.
In one of the companies
the water purification system was sold.
They were assembled using assembly technology
and then sold.
The assembly was done using Korean technology.
The components were purchased,
assembled and offered to the market.
When the Korean specialists came,
they asked
why we did not want to sell our products
using such methods,
such network marketing methods.
We were very surprised
because in this case
this product would not be
taken seriously.
The water purification systems were very serious.
But this company,
surprisingly,
as a result of 2002
became the fastest-growing company in the world
only because
they sold their water purifier
in this way.
Probably,
the time will come when this system
will restore its status in Russia.
We can give an example
of a positive Russian business.
Faberlic company
distributes its products
using this system.
They worked very well.
They immediately decided
on such a sales strategy.
They said that they did not have money
to develop their own sales system.
It is very expensive and costly.
It is better to invest
in the development of the product,
the quality and image of the product.
And then, when the money will come,
we will create our own system.
Now is the time when they create
their own stores and sales network.
At the same time,
they worked on the network marketing system
for about 7 years
and developed their sales.
This company has very good results.
This is a positive example of our market.
I think it will develop further.
Let's see
what types of intermediaries
exist in the application of sales channels.
There are indirect sales
and direct sales.
In the indirect sales strategy,
intermediaries are divided into two types.
They are the owners of the product
and the non-owners.
Those who buy the product
and then sell it
or those who simply offer
the product as agents
and get their interest
and sell it to the client.
What intermediaries
do the owners of the product have?
They are dealers, distributors,
wholesalers,
retail networks
where we sell our product
and they offer it to the end user.
These are companies that sell
their products by catalog.
There are also non-owners.
These are agents,
retail representatives, brokers,
independent agents.
They do not buy,
they just offer the product
and then sell it.
There are also direct sales.
There are no intermediaries.
The company sells itself.
The main seller
is the retail staff
of the company that offers the product.
The retail staff
is the catalog
that develops the product.
This is a mail mail
that is sent by the sellers.
Telemarketing,
phone sales
is also one of the effective channels
of sales
but only in the case of
simple technical production.
We have discussed the main strategies
of sales. However, before
developing your sales strategy,
you need to analyze
how your sales departments
work in your company.
The sales system
that you plan to develop
must be exactly
in line with the structure of your company.
Otherwise, there will be a disbalance
and your system will never work effectively.
Let's see what are the structures
of sales in organizations.
The first is the structure of the product specialization.
You can see it on the slide.
What is the system
in this case
in the company
that is formed?
There is a sales director
who is in charge
of product managers.
When is this structure
effective?
First, when you have
a very complex product
and managers should know its specifics.
They should be able to explain
technical characteristics,
consumer characteristics,
operating system,
features.
When the product is complex,
this system works the most effectively.
The system of product specialization.
That is,
managers sell one product,
then another,
and so on.
Moreover, everyone sells
the product in all regions.
The advantage is that you can take into account
the product specialization.
The disadvantage is that
you have several people in the company
who work on the product.
Each of them goes to one region.
Everyone goes there.
The second one goes there.
It results in duplication.
Therefore, it is necessary
to coordinate the activities of managers
in order to avoid
strong intersections.
Otherwise, what will your intermediaries think about you?
It is a strange company.
First, one offers, then the second,
then the third, and everyone is a manager
in this company.
The next structure,
which is very often
formed in companies,
is the specialization in the industry.
This is also
most often applied
in the industrial markets.
Because each industry
has its own specifics.
The most important thing is to know
the right person,
the person who can make decisions
about the purchase of this product.
Personal relations are very important here.
The requirements for managers
are different.
In the first case,
they should be experts in the product.
Here they should be able
to establish relations
in order to interact
with each industry.
They should find the right person
and offer their product.
This is the specifics.
The good thing is
that there is a very good specialization.
The bad thing is that
the person is responsible for his own direction.
There is a great dependence on managers.
If the relations are established
and the manager suddenly leaves
the competing company,
consider this industry
to be lost.
At least, the first time of your sale
will definitely decrease.
What is the solution?
Here you need to put
duplicators managers,
assistants,
who have studied and know all clients.
What is the goal?
If the manager suddenly leaves,
you will not be left without this client
and this industry.
This is very important.
Because each industry usually
takes a large share
of the company's sales volume.
Therefore, it is risky.
The next structure is the geographical principle.
It is the most frequently used
product in sales
on the FMCG market.
Because the product is
more understandable,
simpler, there are no specialists
in the product,
there is no need to sell in industries.
It is just a system of distribution
on the territories.
Also, managers are subordinate
to the commercial director.
They are called in different ways.
Regional development manager
or commercial director for each region.
It depends on the scale
of the company.
If the company is very large
and the turnover is serious,
it is better to put a person
who will manage the situation
and make decisions
within the framework of this region.
Because it is unrealistic
to control 89 regions
by one commercial director.
Therefore, you need
such middle managers
who will be authorized
to make decisions
within the framework of these regions.
Usually, it is divided into 6-8 groups
on the territory,
on the map.
And, accordingly,
there are some managers
under this person
who are responsible for the regions.
This is the geographical structure.
The advantage of it is
that it has a very good market coverage,
good controllability
if you have a middle manager.
I don't see any disadvantages.
The only disadvantage
is that if you sell a specialized product,
it will be more difficult
to sell it according to the regional principle.
I would like to say a few words
about the matrix structure.
Matrix structure is the intersection
of the managers on the product
with the managers on the region.
The structure is very interesting
and very complex.
When there are several managers
on the product and several managers
on the region,
they intersect at a certain stage.
For example, this month
there will be a manager on the northwest region
and a manager on the product
and air conditioners.
One person on the region
knows where to offer
and the manager on the product
knows the product's specifics.
Then he can tell you about it.
The compilation of these two people
gives a very good result.
The only disadvantage of this system
is that it is difficult to manage.
And it is expensive
because there are many duplications.
But if it is well managed,
it is very effective
and applicable
in any market.
Many companies
work on this system,
especially foreign companies.
They choose this kind of sales system.
Now we will consider
the main mistakes
when forming a sales channel.
Why do we start with mistakes?
To take them into account right away,
when developing a sales network.
What should we pay attention to?
What is happening in Russia?
What do we usually make mistakes
when forming a sales channel?
What prevents us from working?
The first and the most important mistake
is ignoring the place of purchase
by our product's customers.
Why does this happen?
Because when we start
forming a sales channel,
we look at the commercial practice
of the market and see
that we have domestic manufacturers,
foreign ones,
then distributors,
dealers, retailers,
and retail network that sells the product.
The system is very transparent.
We can see it and say
that we will work with such dealers
and distributors,
and here we will work directly
with the retail network.
But we are going from above.
We are not going from the consumer.
And this is where we violate
the rules of marketing,
because we have to take into account
that sometimes we don't see
where we can sell our product.
Where else can we sell?
Let's think about it.
Where can we buy juice?
Ordinary juice.
We can buy it in a retail store,
we can buy it in some
shopping and entertainment center,
in a regular store,
and even in a tray,
and even in a small pavilion
near a bus stop.
This is the whole household network
where we can buy it.
But the juice manufacturers
went further.
They went from the consumer and thought
where else can people buy juice.
And they remembered, for example,
about the pharmacy networks.
You can buy juice in a pharmacy too.
This is a healthy food product.
Why couldn't the buyer
buy this product there?
Cosmetic companies also went,
and now they offer
their products in the pharmacy networks.
Although this is not a standard
sales channel,
but this option,
this consideration by the consumer
allowed us to see an additional
sales channel.
When we look from above and below
and see the full picture,
the main question we have to answer
is where else
can our product
and our client buy?
You see additional niches
where you can
present your product.
The next mistake
that occurs when you create a sales channel
is the confidence
that the sales channels
will change for your offer,
for your new product.
Everyone will agree to sell it,
to work with it.
This is not true.
A new product
is always a problem for a distributor.
Why? Let's recall
his main goal.
His main goal is to make a profit.
The main goal of the seller
is not to offer a new product.
It's not his product,
it's not his brand.
He is not interested in promoting it.
He is interested in making money.
Products that are already known,
that have their own image,
a brand that has been developed for years,
of course, sell better.
And the main thing is to make
a promotion program.
You need to convince
the next intermediaries
to offer this product.
You need to explain what it is better at.
You need to teach the sales representatives
and intermediaries who will offer this product.
Look how many additional efforts
are needed at once.
Who of us likes to make additional efforts?
Therefore,
if you offer a new product to your intermediaries,
you must
provide some preferences,
improved conditions,
increased discount,
additional support,
or costs that he must pay for promotion.
You must take full responsibility.
This is your product, your brand,
your child.
And who will raise your child for you?
Therefore, of course,
you must take this into account.
The next mistake that is often made
is the inconsistency
in choosing distributors.
Why does this happen?
We need to do everything urgently,
without any hesitation, without any assessments.
There is no time to assess,
we need to go to the market quickly.
Let's go out first,
then we'll see what happens.
As a result, what happens?
We wanted to do it as best as possible,
but we chose the wrong distributors.
They spoil the image of our product,
they sell our product poorly,
and we lose time,
not only time, but money.
Because it is believed that the costs
of searching and working for one distributor
are paid only after a year.
Imagine what additional costs
you will incur,
and no one needs them,
without waiting for some time,
two, three weeks,
in order to clearly assess
the need to work with this company.
Therefore,
I urge you to make an effective assessment.
We will see how to do it further.
The next mistake
is the lack of calculations
in the sales channels.
We do not count.
We only count the costs of promotion,
of product development.
We are not used to do this
on the distribution system.
We pay salaries to our managers,
we spend money on business trips,
telephone negotiations,
technical, technological, service support,
but we do not get the effect.
And all because
we simply do not count our costs.
Unfortunately.
There is another problem.
Many companies do not have
a management accounting system.
And when the management accounting system is not established,
we cannot calculate the costs
for each channel,
for each intermediary.
We cannot just divide them.
This complicates the assessment.
In this case, what can I say?
If the company can afford
to spend money without counting,
great, let it spend further.
If there is a need to optimize expenses,
it is necessary to establish
a management accounting system
and start counting.
The lack of budgeting and control
is the result of the mistake
that we have just considered.
That is,
since there is no control,
we cannot calculate
the effectiveness of work with each intermediary.
The next mistake is the unwillingness
to give up the existing,
but not profitable sales channels.
What do our merchants say?
We spent so much effort
to agree with this intermediary,
signed a contract,
traveled on business trips many times,
did everything to work,
and now you want to give it up?
How is that? What about our work?
But, you see,
if we get a minus,
it is no longer a business,
but charity.
If the company sets such a goal,
for God's sake,
if you set the goal of making money,
you will give up
and give up
the unprofitable sales channels.
The next mistake is when
only one sales channel is developed.
Let's try what happens.
If it works out well,
we will move on.
But here are two mistakes.
The first is that we spend time,
that is, time is spent in addition,
and we do not go to the market effectively,
and the market coverage is very small.
Therefore, competitors can outrun us.
They can outrun us and sell several sales channels at once
to understand how it works.
There is nothing to compare with
if you have just one channel.
The next mistake is that
conflicts in sales channels are silenced.
They are not solved,
they are not promoted.
Why is this happening?
It seems to all companies that everyone has problems,
and this problem will go away slowly,
or we will solve it.
In general, something will happen,
everything will be fine.
We show our distributors,
our dealers, our intermediaries
that we just do not want
to work with them as partners.
We give it all to them for a discount,
and they are doing it themselves,
making mistakes,
worsening the image of the product,
carrying out the so-called
drain of the product at low prices,
thus completely spoiling
the market.
Therefore, in the form of a conflict,
they must be solved.
Or make an effort
to eliminate them.
What conflicts usually occur?
Two intermediaries work,
they begin to divide the territory,
and since they work on the same territory,
they constantly intersect,
they compete with each other.
How can these problems be solved?
For example, you can divide the territory,
clearly limit it.
Of course, the conflicts will not go away at all,
but they will decrease,
and this is absolutely true,
and this is the solution to this problem.
Another option that can be made
is to divide the assortment of products.
Part of the assortment should be given to one intermediary,
and part to a completely different one.
Thus, they will not intersect
in the market, in the territory,
and will fully represent
the production of your company.
A very good way out.
So try it.
The next mistake is when
strategically important business relations are not established.
That is, we do not support
loyal relations.
It seems to us that we have a good product,
the margin is good,
the intermediary will not leave us.
This is a big mistake.
You should always try to support
human relations.
Moreover, for Russia, this is very important.
When a lot is built
in business on human relations.
Therefore, find people and influence them,
support relations,
give them some preferences,
invite them to your holidays,
to your exhibitions,
develop loyalty programs
so that the already created system
and the effective one
will not disappear from you.
Otherwise, you will spend additional funds
on additional development of the system.
And one more mistake
that I would like to mention.
The client base is not being conducted.
Of course, it is conducted somewhere on paper,
or maybe even on a computer,
but it is not systematized.
All the data that we need
is not indicated there.
It is not updated.
This is not a working system.
The information system should be constantly relevant.
What is it for?
It is needed primarily for the company manager,
for the commercial director,
and the least needed
is the sales manager.
Why?
Because having created your client base,
the manager can go to another company,
maybe even to a competitor,
and take advantage of this base.
But for the company it is a big failure.
Therefore,
the formation of a client base
is strategically important for the company
to keep the client base as much as possible.
Even if your manager leaves,
you can try to restore the relationship.
After all, often the company is loyal
not just to a person,
but to the company in general.
Because you can provide
a well-established service,
good prices.
Then
your partner will not leave you.